---
layout: post
title: 'Issue 4: Tech Bosses At The Border'
category: Volume 1
image:
    file: vol-1-issue-4-header.jpeg
    alt: Palmer Luckey thinks it's another fun way to make more money. For others, it's a matter of life and death.
    caption: Palmer Luckey thinks it's another fun way to make more money. For others, it's a matter of life and death.
    source_link: null
    half_width: false
---

<!-- Content imported from: http://eepurl.com/dx4mIn -->

Peter Thiel exploiting handouts from the government, Founders Fund pitch decks shared over Chick-fil-A, a Lord of the Rings collector sword, _MythBusters_' final fall from grace—[**these details are only the tip of the iceberg of horror behind Oculus founder's latest venture: a VR forcefield inside "_Call of Duty&nbsp;_goggles" for detecting and trapping border crossers**](https://www.wired.com/story/palmer-luckey-anduril-border-wall/). Read and wallow in despair—then get moving because y'all, we've got work to do.

  
_They had a name and an executive team. But what was the product? “The DOD has been asking for what some people describe as&nbsp;Call of Duty goggles,” Luckey says. “Like, you put on the glasses, and the headset display tells you where the good guys are, where the bad guys are, where your air support is, where you’re going, where you were.” (Pause to consider this Escher-esque scenario of soldiers clamoring for gear inspired by a game that mimics their combat experience.) But tiny Anduril—with no experience or history—couldn’t just barge into the Pentagon and demand to build battlefield tech. “We needed a quick win,” Schimpf says.  _
_  
Anduril’s pitch deck offered a sci-fi fantasia, including autonomous long-range bombers, attack-drone swarms, and something they called “perimeter security on a pole.” The team zeroed in on this last notion. They figured they could build a surveillance tower using off-the-shelf sensors and cameras, connect them in a network, and make something in the spirit of Google Maps and Pokémon Go. By using AI, the system would identify what data was important ...&nbsp;in a 10-week period, Lattice’s test in Texas helped customs agents catch 55 unauthorized border crossers._  
    
&nbsp;
Tech Workers Coalition stands against the use of surveillance technology to monitor the migration of people, the majority of whom are looking for work or escaping oppressive and violent conditions in their countries. We recognize the economic in-opportunity and entrapment bred by American foreign policy and trade agreements. We are opposed to the unaccountable expansion of police and military power through the use of technology. For Palmer Luckey, this is just another fun way to make money; but for the people trying to cross the border, it's a matter of life and death. 

<!--excerpt-->

{% include post_image.html %}

### Worker's Perspective

Peter Thiel exploiting handouts from the government, Founders Fund pitch decks shared over Chick-fil-A, a Lord of the Rings collector sword, _MythBusters_' final fall from grace—[**these details are only the tip of the iceberg of horror behind Oculus founder's latest venture: a VR forcefield inside "_Call of Duty&nbsp;_goggles" for detecting and trapping border crossers**](https://www.wired.com/story/palmer-luckey-anduril-border-wall/). Read and wallow in despair—then get moving because y'all, we've got work to do.

  
_They had a name and an executive team. But what was the product? “The DOD has been asking for what some people describe as&nbsp;Call of Duty goggles,” Luckey says. “Like, you put on the glasses, and the headset display tells you where the good guys are, where the bad guys are, where your air support is, where you’re going, where you were.” (Pause to consider this Escher-esque scenario of soldiers clamoring for gear inspired by a game that mimics their combat experience.) But tiny Anduril—with no experience or history—couldn’t just barge into the Pentagon and demand to build battlefield tech. “We needed a quick win,” Schimpf says.  _
_  
Anduril’s pitch deck offered a sci-fi fantasia, including autonomous long-range bombers, attack-drone swarms, and something they called “perimeter security on a pole.” The team zeroed in on this last notion. They figured they could build a surveillance tower using off-the-shelf sensors and cameras, connect them in a network, and make something in the spirit of Google Maps and Pokémon Go. By using AI, the system would identify what data was important ...&nbsp;in a 10-week period, Lattice’s test in Texas helped customs agents catch 55 unauthorized border crossers._  
    
&nbsp;
Tech Workers Coalition stands against the use of surveillance technology to monitor the migration of people, the majority of whom are looking for work or escaping oppressive and violent conditions in their countries. We recognize the economic in-opportunity and entrapment bred by American foreign policy and trade agreements. We are opposed to the unaccountable expansion of police and military power through the use of technology. For Palmer Luckey, this is just another fun way to make money; but for the people trying to cross the border, it's a matter of life and death. 


###  Upcoming Events

 **Resisting Attacks on Labor, Migrant Workers, & Their Communities**  
Thursday, 6/21 7PM at 2940 16th Street in San Francisco  
[Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/events/601409856904924/)  
  
**LABORFEST 2018**  
Kicks off with a History of Labor bike tour,&nbsp;Sunday, 7/1 12PM at 518 Valencia in San Francisco  
[Full event schedule](http://www.laborfest.net/wp/)The [Code of Conduct](https://techworkerscoalition.org/community-guide/) is in effect at all TWC events.


### News

This week in Amazon's evil


### Song Of The Week

_All that harms labor is treason to America. No line can be drawn between these two. If any man tells you he loves America, yet he hates labor, he is a liar. If a man tells you he trusts America, yet fears labor, he is a fool.  _
_  
I am glad to see that a system of labor prevails under which laborers can strike when they want to ... I like the system which lets man quit when he wants to and wish it might prevail everywhere.  
  
The stronger bond of human sympathy, outside of the family relation, should be one uniting all working people of all nations, tongues and kindreds._  
    
&nbsp;
- Abraham Lincoln


