---
layout: post
title: "Fellow Instacart Office Workers, Listen to Shoppers"
category: "Volume 3"
image:
    file: vol-3-issue-25-header.jpg
    alt: "TODO: alt (hover) text"
    caption: "TODO: image caption"
    source_link: null
    half_width: false
preview: Ex-Instacart program manager Kevin says why shoppers know best
---

Today, Kevin O’Connell shares his journey from pizza delivery and grocery stocking to IT program manager at Instacart, where he almost didn’t listen to shoppers. And tomorrow, shopper-organizers with [Gig Workers Collective](https://twitter.com/GigWC) are hosting a hybrid listening session to share their latest analysis of how to improve their work. After four years of making demands and winning concessions, GWC invites corporate workers to discuss what fellow workers can do for one another. Register here LINK TO COME

<!-- DO NOT remove the excerpt tag -->
<!--excerpt-->
<!-- remaining content goes below here -->

<!-- DO NOT remove the header image -->
{% include post_image.html %}

## The Worker's Perspective

_By Kevin O'Connell_

####I’ve been on a long journey to make sense of office work**

In a hurry? I know, life is like that. Register for a 1pm Dec. 15 listening session with Instacart shopper-organizers.

Now, here's my story.

My upbringing was pretty blue collar and work was typically labor intensive. Before finding my way into tech, I made and delivered pizzas. I unloaded grocery delivery trucks. I built houses with my father in New England, and I had an interest in graphic design but couldn’t afford to go to art school. I dropped out of community college when the check I wrote for the upcoming semester’s classes bounced. I needed to work if I was going to afford school, and as soon as I realized I could work in an office and not outside in the elements every day I was like, How do I do that instead?

I scraped by for several years in New York and then San Francisco hoping to find my purpose or path. During that time, I lived paycheck to paycheck surviving on crackers and peanut butter for a week at a time until the next payday. It was a stark contrast to the world of free snacks, catered lunches, and generous vacation policies I was immersed in just a few years later. 

By 2015, I was used to commuting into San Francisco from Oakland every day for work. The days were long and it was only after a few months of grocery shopping in the evenings then making dinner pretty late at night that I discovered Instacart. It was so convenient, ordering groceries on Instacart before leaving my office, timing it to ensure my order would be delivered around the same time as I got home, and eating dinner before I was ready to fall asleep. It completely changed my routine for the better. I felt so grateful for the convenience and the people that made it possible that I made sure to tip generously, after all I knew all too well what it was like making deliveries and getting by mostly on tips. 

So when I heard about [Instacart siphoning tips from shoppers](https://www.theverge.com/2019/2/6/18214335/instacart-reverse-controversial-pay-policy-tip-stealing), I was offended. I stopped using the service and went back to shopping on a weeknight and tried to be better at meal planning. At some point there was this notion that the issue with the tips was an error, Instacart had fixed it, and things were back to normal. I suppose it happens all the time, someone makes a mistake or a bad decision, the company feels obligated to make it right, then they do. Everyone vows to take a lesson learned from the situation and moves on, and at some point I had started using the service again casually. 

And then in 2019 I had an opportunity to work at Instacart. Imagine that. I obviously had some misgivings, but after a few conversations with important people in my life, it seemed like this opportunity was the right move for my career and I accepted the job. My personal feelings were that the gig economy was problematic but that tech companies had usually aligned with my principles. 

####It’s been a struggle choosing between my career and my principles

My experience at Instacart was much like that of other tech companies. Free snacks, catered lunches, and good people that cared about social and economic issues who want to do the right thing. What was different was that this was the first job in my entire career where I did not have to be on-site and could actually work from home. 

And then the pandemic hit. Early on, an Instacart shopper protected only by a simple face covering delivered groceries to my home — that was the first time I realized how much risk this person was taking on themselves just by showing up to work. I’m sure you’ve heard this talking point many times before but Instacart, like all gig economy tech companies, classify the people that make up the labor force of their business model as independent contractors. They’re not actual employees, so they don’t get benefits. If they get sick or die, that’s it. Nothing. Imagine being out in public every day shopping for groceries and delivering them to people’s homes in those first weeks of the pandemic when we’d immediately wash our clothes we wore outside of the house when we got home, obsessively wash our hands, and not have any insurance provided by your employer if you got sick or contracted COVID. 

Privately I would ask some of my coworkers at Instacart, What are we doing for shoppers as independent contractors with no benefits or protection? Why do we call their jobs “essential” but not treat them that way? Is that why we’re contracting (hiring) hundreds of thousands of shoppers, to absorb the turnover and losses? But I never had the courage to demand those answers from the executives. I was afraid of being retaliated against by the company and I was carrying some heavy baggage from an experience with a previous manager and didn’t want to self-sabotage again. 

The worst part for me was that I knew what Instacart was doing for shoppers was not enough. During the early global shortage of PPE, I remember a coworker using government contacts to pull a few strings and get PPE to shoppers. It seemed an impossible accomplishment, and there was a feeling of pride and achievement that day, but that didn’t change benefits or protections for shoppers. Combined with the company’s efforts to pass Prop 22, an attempt to permanently remove worker rights, and it was starting to feel like there was something wrong happening here. During that time the company was offering us prewritten comms to use on social media when sharing open roles (to be fair, lots of tech companies do this), stating how it was on lists of great places to work, and I thought “maybe for us corporate workers, but certainly not for shoppers.” 

Internally, members of the leadership were devoting time to talk with corporate employees about the company’s stance on the issue. Sadly though, the company line during these sessions was something to effect of “we don’t want this big authority of the government telling us how to do business” and initially I was sort of under the spell of that line of thinking, it’s sort of punk rock at its core (the way I like to feel about myself) but then I realized that regulation and contracts are not the same – and Instacart is holding power over shoppers who can’t choose their conditions.

It was starting to feel like the leadership was either tone deaf, unable to hear criticism, or hadn’t really had a chance to listen to or get good data from the shoppers. One Prop 22 poll [seemed framed to mislead](https://www.kqed.org/news/11843123/prop-22-explained-why-gig-companies-are-spending-huge-money-on-an-unprecedented-measure#surveys) the mere ~300 respondents. I wondered what long-time vocal shoppers said, what data have they collected and analyzed?

If I’m trying to be as empathetic as possible I suppose I can see where the founders might be coming from. I have no idea what it’s like to start a company, work on a single idea for many years, putting everything else on hold or at risk, see it come so far and be so close to a successful IPO. I can also give them the benefit of the doubt and assume that they started with the simple notion of “hey, wouldn’t it be cool if we had groceries delivered?” and not “hey, wouldn’t it be fun if we screwed over hundreds of thousands of people who shop for us as independent contractors?” 

Regardless of how it started, I can imagine it’s impossible for one person to stop the runaway train of corporate greed. However, it didn’t seem like anyone was trying to stop it, quite the opposite – it was full steam ahead. 

One day my groceries came [stuffed with pro-Prop 22 fliers](https://sanfrancisco.cbslocal.com/2020/10/13/prop-22-instacart-provided-some-contract-workers-with-stickers-fliers-promoting-controversial-ballot-measure/) about how shoppers were voting for it because of all the freedom and flexibility it allows them to keep. Spoiler, it doesn’t. It felt like dirty union busting tactics and the very people getting the short end of the stick on Prop 22 were the ones required to spread misinformation about it by stuffing it in my groceries. 

When Prop 22 passed I was heartbroken, even though it was [ruled unconstitutional by the CA Supreme Court](https://www.kqed.org/news/11885905/bay-area-judge-rules-uber-lyft-backed-prop-22-is-unconstitutional) in August, I still feel guilt over it. Perhaps other tech workers may not want to feel the same guilt as I do, and I’m honestly not sure if there is a world in which these giant gig companies don’t exist, but looking at it all now I realize it shouldn’t be about guilt or abolishing these companies, but abolishing their bad practices. Maybe that world of giant gig companies being here to stay has relationships and allyship between corporate workers and gig workers. Maybe these types of bad behaviors are even prevented before they can negatively impact someone’s life in a very real way. 

I’d also heard about [Gig Workers Collective](https://twitter.com/GigWC), a grassroots group of Instacart shoppers organizing. I read about their success in bringing about concrete changes to their job and even [getting public apologies from the company](https://techcrunch.com/2019/02/06/instacart-ceo-apologizes-for-tipping-debacle/). It seems so obvious to be in dialogue with the people doing the work — talking face to face, looking at the data they collect, letting them run the company. [Shoppers love their job. They want it to be doable and livable](https://news.techworkerscoalition.org/2021/11/02/issue-23/). 

####Instacart colleagues, you have an opportunity to listen to the shoppers

I left Instacart in early 2021 to find better alignment of my interests with my responsibilities. Before leaving I had started writing a song in solidarity with gig workers and was now wondering what else I could do beyond self-expression and sharing links on social media. I was inspired by the tactic of donation matching by these tech companies and started looking for a non-profit I could partner with to match proceeds as a donation when I came back across GWC. 

My first immediate thought was “Oh fuck, it’s [the ‘open letter to the CEO’](https://medium.com/@gigworkerscollective/dear-apoorva-mehta-founder-and-ceo-of-instacart-944ca4db6ad0) people” that the company had seemed to have this air of annoyance or frustration about, which gave me pause initially. But when I removed the guilt I had been feeling about my journey and the long way around I had taken, when I looked beyond what seemed to me like loud, angry, us-versus-them tactics, when I thought rationally about their issues and interests, I understood better what they’re trying to do. 

I ended up reaching out to GWC when [my band released the song](https://news.techworkerscoalition.org/2021/11/09/issue-24/) and raised a modest amount of money for GWC too, and after a few conversations with them I found something similar to my experiences working in tech: good people who care about social and economic issues trying to do the right thing. And my band released the song and raised a modest amount of money for GWC too.

Through this partnership I was introduced to the Tech Workers Coalition, who are looking to build allyship between tech workers and gig workers, and engineer Eddy Hernandez who had [a similar journey leaving Uber](https://news.techworkerscoalition.org/2020/10/30/issue-13/). Now I’m coming back to Instacart for what tech CEOs love to call “a fireside chat” but in this case it’s more of a listening session. An opportunity for tech workers in the gig economy sector to hear directly from Instacart shoppers. Corporate employees can learn a lot from shoppers in their positive hopes of reimagining the company. I’m not advocating for burning it all down, after all there is still a lot of opportunity for people to make money with a lot of flexibility, but I can’t ignore that that promise has not been delivered. 

So what can you do? Right now? Tipping generously is a good start, but there’s more you can do with the same low barrier of entry.  

Join this listening session with GWC. It’s not a protest – we protested for other social and economic issues but we didn’t build many relationships. Register to join the listening session to hear directly from shoppers. If you read this after 1pm on Dec. 15, sign up to join the ally list. 

<hr>

Thank you to Willy Solis and Vanessa Bain of [GWC](https://twitter.com/GigWC) for being open to talking with me. I wish I’d reached out earlier. Thank you also to Eddy Hernandez for hearing my story and sharing his too. And many thanks to my former Instacart colleagues for considering listening to GWC this week; RSVP here to listen in.

## Song

#### [Inside Out, by The Strange Ones](https://wearethestrangeones.bandcamp.com/track/inside-out)

_When it’s inside out
Turn those lines around
And pick the pockets of the new establishment
They don’t share the wealth
They keep it for themselves
And break the backs of the low income working class
You’ve got a choice to make_
