---
layout: post
title: "On Mechanical Turk, AI ethics means ‘Do No Harm’"
category: "Volume 4"
image:
    file: vol-4-issue-4-header.jpg
    alt: "An psycahdelic image of a purle-pink keyboard person with"
    caption: "On MTurk, there are humans right at your fingertips - that’s us!"
    source_link: null
    half_width: false
preview: "Academics, don’t say one thing to us and do another"
---

In the field of AI ethics, academics like Matt Lease talk and get grants to help workers while also allowing AI systems to harm them. Today, workers in [Turkopticon](https://twitter.com/turkopticon) describe their solutions to ‘mass rejections,’ a form of wage theft by academics posting work to Amazon Mechanical Turk, and their demands and solutions for academics to help end the harm.

<!-- DO NOT remove the excerpt tag -->
<!--excerpt-->
<!-- remaining content goes below here -->

<!-- DO NOT remove the header image -->
{% include post_image.html %}

## The Worker's Perspective

_By [Turkopticon_](https://twitter.com/turkopticon)_

We are a collective of Turker-organizers trying to protect our rights while earning a living. And this isn’t easy. So, we need to talk about the academics who talk about “AI ethics” and get grants to build algorithmic tools that promise solutions but run out of funding before they help us, the workers. To us, true ethics means supporting workers in building our own tools to make work easier. That’s why we in [Turkopticon](https://turkopticon.net/) are in a coalition with [TurkerView](https://turkerview.com/) and [TurkerNation](https://www.reddit.com/r/TurkerNation/), and other allies to demand an end to specific harms. This is aimed at AI ethics professors and Amazon employees like Matt Lease.

#### Getting into Turking

First, how do we get here? Everyone has their own story. One of us, C, started looking into crowd work when a 2012 economic crisis in their country led to hyperinflation:
> To give you an idea of what it was like, the yearly inflation rate was 20% in 2012, and by 2015, it was 181%. So in 2012, I signed up on MTurk but received a few emails saying my submission would be reviewed based on business needs, and they would let me know whether their account was accepted or denied. I didn't receive any communication until 3-4 years later, an acceptance. I was doing different things at that time – freelancing for businesses on platforms like Upwork, DJ-ing at Halloween parties, tutoring calculus to university students, whatever could bring money to the table helped. Even if I have a degree in Electrical Engineering, in times of uncertainty, I need to be more flexible and adapt – “Be water, my friend.”

In Turkopticon, we all agree: we’re for, not against, Amazon Mechanical Turk. We’re thankful for the opportunity to find accessible remote work on a constant basis. And we take pride in helping businesses and academics improve ‘smart’ devices and algorithms. Even though [we are "hidden" behind our screens](https://news.techworkerscoalition.org/2021/03/09/issue-5/), verifying identities, transcribing documents, and captioning videos, we are humans with rights. We demand respect.

#### Mass rejection and wage theft by academics

Unethical behavior like wage theft is unacceptable. But unfortunately, we tend to expect unethical behavior from businesses, so we want to focus on academics who talk about ethics.

For context: Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) is a platform that helps businesses and academics harvest human intelligence. They create accounts as “requesters” and post Human Intelligence Tasks (HITs) for us, the Turkers, to complete. These HITS can take anywhere from a few seconds to an hour to complete, with pay varying wildly from a few cents to a dollar each, without explanation.

But Amazon favors requesters, not us – they pay to play, and we just do the work. If a requester decides to reject a huge batch of completed HITs without reason, we can lose a day’s work and wages. These “mass rejections” are wage theft, plain and simple, and we have no means of appeal. [According to Amazon](https://www.politico.eu/article/coronavirus-pandemic-worker-rights-amazon-uber-upwork/), this happens to ~1% of workers, and [a study by Cloud Research](https://www.cloudresearch.com/resources/blog/how-many-amazon-mturk-workers-are-there/) estimates that there are ~250,000 Turkers, so ~2,500 mass rejections per year cost us time, earnings, and the ability to work. A mass rejection can make it nearly impossible for us to find work, as most requesters require a 99% rating to complete their tasks. This affects our ability to provide for a family and our ability to put money into our communities. This is not ethical.

Some of us have been lucky, but we know this affects all works. One of us, A, got 4 out of 4 tasks rejected without any feedback on how to correct mistakes:
> I knew I was careful in the first place. But I immediately blocked the requester, who was new on the platform without any reviews on Turkopticon. And luckily, I already had a ratings buffer big enough to absorb the hit. Others take you much more time and effort to get back to 99%, and many lose their livelihood in an instant.

So, who is responsible for mass rejections? Based on reports we’ve seen, it's at least 60% academic – including many of the same people who talk about AI ethics, accountability, and the future of work.

#### Ethics and broken promises

Turkers face all kinds of problems, but in our position, even a minor hiccup is hard for us to cure. Numerous people reach out to us about getting suspended as soon as they register for Mechanical Turk. Was it because of a new waiting period? A flag on their email or their country of origin? There’s no way for us to know; Amazon’s policies are private to us, and their algorithms are impossible to explain.

So, when an academic named Matt Lease came to us and offered to arrange communications with academic requesters to help identify problems and come up with solutions, we agreed. In 2020, Turkopticon hosted an open forum for requesters to discuss their experiences with the platform. Matt was invited with the understanding he would engage us and requesters and take concerns back to Amazon. But to our surprise, Matt brought the majority of the Mechanical Turk team to the call. This appeared to be an intimidation tactic, and it worked on us as well as requesters, who seemed to hold back their opinions in the face of a strong Amazon presence. One exception was Chris Callison-Burch, who seemed fine talking about his work. 

This was a lost opportunity and a slap in the face. It is rare and difficult for us to engage academic requesters in dialogue. Worse, following that meeting, Matt stopped responding to our communications even though he had previously encouraged us to send them along. At the time, he was on sabbatical and involved with the Amazon Mechanical Turk department. Later we found out he joined Amazon’s payroll. We’ve heard he is now working on a cooperative platform to solve our problems without our input. 

Academics have big ideas about how to help Turkers, like building a better AI system. This sounds nice, but in most cases, these algorithms aren’t learning or improving, which results in worker harm and not worker help. Saiph Savage wrote a grant to build a system to help Turkers determine who to work for and which requesters to avoid. Ultimately this project failed because it did not work, and the project ran out of funding. We Are Dynamo, a project started by Niloufar Salehi, set forth guidelines for requesters to follow. Still, after investing a huge effort into this, funding ran out, and Niloufar graduated. Thankfully, her advisor, Michael Bernstein, has committed to working toward what Turkers need for the long term. But this is a problem with academic solutions to labor issues overall: they are usually in short-term contracts or programs, and funding is attached to one grant for a certain number of years. And general requester conduct is a problem too. Callison-Burch has dozens of students posting HITs through his account and a customer service representative fielding questions and concerns. Others create multiple accounts to publish, take down, and re-post HITs. These practices undermine efforts to educate academics on using Mechanical Turk ethically.

#### Turkers ideas and solutions

We know that not all HITS are completed satisfactorily, sometimes due to bad actors among Turkers, and that mass rejections may need to happen. But they should not cause harm or be without a means of good-faith appeal. Beyond losing time and wages, mass rejections can affect a Turker’s ability to work because mass rejections lower our approval rating, a value assigned to each Turker based on the amount of HITs successfully completed. Most requesters require a 99% approval rating to complete their tasks, and mass rejections make it difficult to qualify for work on the platform. This directly affects workers’ livelihood, their ability to provide for their families, and certainly eliminates their ability to put money back into their communities.  

AMT is totally unbalanced for Turkers, which is terrible for the whole ecosystem. For example, when a worker signs up in the United States, Amazon requires proof of ID, a bank account, and contact information. On the other hand, requesters may give fake names and emails without verifying their identities and can even use a burner debit card; they don’t have to prove a thing except that they can pay to play. Knowing that requesters are not held to the same standards causes many Turkers to approach work – even that of ethical academics – with extreme caution due to fear of rejections. As Turkers, we need recourse. 

Instead of academics building what they think we need, they can show up to help. We invite all academics to come turk with us anytime! In response to our work needs, we have created our own resources: [Turkopticon](https://turkopticon.net/requesters) for reviewing requesters, as well as [TurkerView](https://turkerview.com/), [MTurkSuite](https://github.com/Kadauchi/mturk-suite), [TurkerNation](https://www.reddit.com/r/TurkerNation/), [HIT Forker](https://greasyfork.org/en/scripts/36368-hit-forker), [Panda Crazy](https://github.com/JohnnyRS/PandaCrazy-Max), the list goes on. 

But at a basic level, if Matt Lease can bring a whole team from Amazon to meet with Turkers, he can deliver our demands to them as well, to end the harm of mass rejections. We demand that these individuals take a serious look at reforming the MTurk system and find a way to get rid of requesters committing repeated wage theft. 

#### Our demand to Matt Lease and others at Amazon:

As of today, over 500 Turkers signed [our Coworker petition](https://www.coworker.org/petitions/end-the-harm-of-mass-rejections) to Matt Lease and three other Amazon employees. Together, we demand the following:
1. Limit the number of rejections the platform will allow to affect a worker’s approval rate when a requester rejects all work (i.e., 10 rejections per day would affect the approval rating, the others would, of course, still be rejected, but only the first 10 would affect the worker’s rating.)
2. Consult with the coalition of worker forums to problem-solve together to create solutions and improve Mechanical Turk for everyone.

Academics, if you believe in ethical tech – do studies, give talks, and get grants to repeat the cycle – come work with Turkers. We know rejections may need to happen; we demand reasons and a means of appeal. This can reduce the risks of working for new requesters, and it can balance the AMT ecosystem so it works for everyone. Until then, we’re building tools to solve our problems, and we’re here if you need to talk.

<hr>

If you work on MTurk, or you post requests, [sign our petition](https://www.coworker.org/petitions/end-the-harm-of-mass-rejections) and get in touch [@turkopticon](https://twitter.com/turkopticon). Thanks to TWC for the strategy and solidarity getting this story out.
